---
title: "Addressing Cold-start Problem in Click-Through Rate Prediction via 
  Supervised Diffusion Modeling"
collection: publications
category: conferences
permalink: /publication/2025-02-25-csdm-3
excerpt: 'Diffusion Modeling for Recommendation Systems'
date: 2025-02-25
venue: 'AAAI'
slidesurl: 'https://github.com/WNQzhu/CSDM'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.06270'
bibtexurl: 'http://WNQzhu.github.io/files/zhu_csdm_aaai25.bib'
citation: '<b>Wenqiao Zhu</b>, Lulu Wang, and Jun Wu. (2025). &quot;Addressing Cold-start Problem in Click-Through Rate Prediction via 
  Supervised Diffusion Modeling.&quot; In <i>AAAI</i>'
---

Predicting Click-Through Rates is a crucial function within recommendation and advertising platforms, as the output of CTR prediction determines the order of items shown to users. The Embedding & MLP paradigm has become a standard approach for industrial recommendation systems and has been widely deployed. However, this paradigm suffers from cold-start problems, where there is either no or only limited user action data available, leading to poorly learned ID embeddings. The cold-start problem hampers the performance of new items. To address this problem, we designed a novel diffusion model to generate a warmed-up embedding for new items. Specifically, we define a novel diffusion process between the ID embedding space and the side information space. In addition, we can derive a sub-sequence from the diffusion steps to expedite training, given that our diffusion model is non-Markovian. Our diffusion model is supervised by both the variational inference and binary cross-entropy objectives, enabling it to generate warmed-up embeddings for items in both the cold-start and warm-up phases. Additionally, we have conducted extensive experiments on three recommendation datasets. The results confirmed the effectiveness of our approach.
